Update Testing Ballerina code (#1133)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: learn/testing-ballerina-code/writing-tests.md

---
layout: ballerina-left-nav-pages
title: Writing Tests
description: Learn how to use Ballerina's built-in test framework to write tests. The test framework provides a set of
 annotations and assertions to help write and run tests.
keywords: ballerina, programming language, testing
permalink: /learn/testing-ballerina-code/writing-tests/
active: writing-tests
redirect_from:
  - /v1-2/learn/testing-ballerina-code/writing-tests
  - /learn/testing-ballerina-code/writing-tests
---

# Writing Tests

## Project Structure

```
project-name/
  Ballerina.toml
    src/
      module1/
        main.bal
        Module.md 
        [resources/]   
        tests/       	  # Module-specific tests
          main_test.bal   # The test file for main.bal
          [resources]	  # Resources for the tests
```

## Test source files

> Unit tests bound to a module need to be placed in a subfolder called ***tests/*** within the module. In a standard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unit tests bound to a module need to be placed in a sub folder called ***tests/*** within the module. In a standard
```

 Ballerina project, a module is mapped to a test suite. All tests within a module’s *tests/* subfolder are
  considered to be part of the same test suite.

> The test source files could have any name. The test functions are just Ballerina functions that use a special

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test source files could have any name. The test functions are just Ballerina functions, which use a special
```

 annotation to mark the function as a test. Test functions must be specified with the `@test:Config {}` annotation and there is no restriction on the test function name.

## Test Resources

> The resources subdirectory found within the *tests/* directory is meant to contain any files or resources that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resources sub directory found within the *tests/* directory is meant to contain any files or resources that are
```

 exclusively required for testing. You can access the resource files either using the absolute path or using the path relative to the project root.

## Defining a test

The test module provides the necessary annotations to construct a test suite. Therefore, importing the test module is essential in order to write Ballerina tests.

```
import ballerina/test;
```

Once the test module is imported, the following annotation can be used to write a test function.

### @test:Config {}

> The function specified following the annotation is a test function. This annotation supports the following value fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function specified after the annotation is a test function. This annotation supports the following value fields.
```

> *   ***enable: {true&#124;false}*** - Enable/disable the test. Default: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   ***enable: {true&#124;false}*** - Enable/disable the test. The default value is `true`.
```

> *   ***before: "&lt;function name&gt;"*** - Name of the function to be run just before the test is run. Default: none

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   ***before: "&lt;function name&gt;"*** - Name of the function to be run just before the test is run. The default value is `none`.
```

*   ***after: "&lt;function name&gt;"*** - Name of the function to be run just after the test is run.
*   ***dependsOn: ["&lt;function names>", …]*** - List of function names on which the test function depends. The
 order in

>  which the comma-separated list appears has no prominence. In case there needs to be an order, define a sequence of test functions with one pointing to another based on the dependencies using the `dependsOn` parameter in each one’s config in order to control the order of test execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 which the comma-separated list appears has no prominence. In case there needs to be an order, define a sequence of test functions with one pointing to another based on the dependencies using the `dependsOn` parameter in each one’s config to control the order of the test execution.
```

*   ***dataProvider: “&lt;function name>”*** - Specifies the name of the function that will be used to provide the value
 sets to execute the test against.

> *   ***groups: [“&lt;test group name”, …]*** - A comma-separated list of test group names (one or more) that this test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   ***groups: [“&lt;test group name”, …]*** - A comma-separated list of test group names (one or more) to which this test
```

>  belongs to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 belongs.
```

***Example:***

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/test;

function beforeFunc() {

>     // This is the before Test Function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // This is the function, which will be executed before the Test Function.
```

}

function afterFunc() {

>     // This is the before Test Function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // This is the before Test Function
```
Same comment as above repeated here. Please check.

Author: Corrected it to `after Test function.`

}

> // This test function will not be executed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This test function will not be executed.
```

@test:Config {
enable: false,
}
function testFunction1() {
    io:println("I'm in test function 1!");
    test:assertTrue(true, msg = "Failed!");
}

> // This test function depends on `testFunction1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This test function depends on the `testFunction1`.
```

@test:Config{  
    before: "beforeFunc",
    after: "afterFunc",
    dependsOn: ["testFunction3"],
    dataProvider:"dataGen",
    groups: ["g1"]
}
function testFunction2 (int value) returns error? {
    test:assertEquals(value, 1, msg = "value is not correct");
}

function dataGen() returns (int[][]) {
    return [[1]];
}

> // This is a random test function. This will randomly execute without depending on other functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This is a random test function. This will randomly execute without depending on the other functions.
```

    return (a + b);
}
```

### **assertNotEquals(Any actual, Any expected, string message)**

Asserts that the actual is not equal to the expected with an optional message.

***Example:***

```ballerina
import ballerina/test;

@test:Config {}
function testAssertIntEquals() {

    int answer = 0;
    int a = 5;
    int b = 3;
    answer = intAdd(a, b);
    test:assertNotEquals(answer, 8, msg = "Matches");
}

function intAdd(int a, int b) returns (int) {
    return (a + b);
}
```

### **assertFail(string message)**

Fails the test. This is useful to fail a test based on a check for a condition while it is in execution.

***Example:***

```ballerina
import ballerina/test;

@test:Config {}
function foo() {
    error? e = trap bar(); // Expecting `bar()` to panic
    if (e is error) {
        test:assertEquals(e.reason(), "Invalid Operation", msg = "Invalid error reason"); // Some other assertions
    } else {
        test:assertFail(msg = "Expected an error");
    }
}
```

## Setup and Teardown

The following test annotations can be used for setup and teardown instructions. These annotations enable executing instructions in different levels.

### @test:BeforeSuite {}

> The function specified following the annotation will be run once before any of the tests in the test suite is run. This can be used for initializing the test suite level aspects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function specified afterg the annotation will be run once before any of the tests in the test suite is run. This can be used for initializing the test suite level aspects.
```

***Example:***

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/test;

// The `BeforeSuite` function is executed before running all the test functions in this module. 
@test:BeforeSuite
function beforeFunc() {
    io:println("I'm the before suite function!");
}

> // Test function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The Test function.
```

@test:Config {}
function testFunction1() {
    io:println("I'm in test function 1!");
    test:assertTrue(true, msg = "Failed");
}

> // Test function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The Test function.
```
Same comment repeated as above. Please check.

@test:Config {}
function testFunction2() {
    io:println("I'm in test function 2!");
    test:assertTrue(true, msg = "Failed");
}
```

### @test:BeforeEach {}

> The function specified following the annotation will be run before every test within the test suite is run. This can be used for repeatedly initializing test-level aspects before every test function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function specified after the annotation will be run before every test when the test suite is run. This can be used for initializing test-level aspects repeatedly before every test function.
```

***Example:***

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/test;

> // Before each function, which is executed before each test function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The `BeforeEach` function, which is executed before each test function.
```

@test:BeforeEach
function beforeFunc() {
    io:println("I'm the before function!");
}

> // Test function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The Test function.
```

@test:Config {}
function testFunction1() {
    io:println("I'm in test function 1!");
    test:assertTrue(true, msg = "Failed!");
}

> // Test function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The Test function.
```
Same comment repeated as above. Please check.

@test:Config {}
function testFunction2() {
    io:println("I'm in test function 2!");
    test:assertTrue(true, msg = "Failed!");
}

> // Test function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The Test function.
```
Same comment repeated as above. Please check.

@test:Config {}
function testFunction3() {
    io:println("I'm in test function 3!");
    test:assertTrue(true, msg = "Failed!");
}
```

### @test:AfterSuite {}

> The function specified following the annotation will be run once after all of the tests in the test suite is run. This can be used for cleaning up the test suite level aspects. The test suite covers tests related to a module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function specified after the annotation will be run once after all of the tests in the test suite is run. This can be used for cleaning up the test suite level aspects. The test suite covers tests related to a module.
```

***Example:***

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/test;

> // Test function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The Test function.
```

@test:Config {}
function testFunction1() {
    io:println("I'm in test function 1!");
    test:assertTrue(true, msg = "Failed");
}

> // The `AfterSuite` function is executed after all the test functions in this module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The `AfterSuite` function is executed after all the test functions in this module.
```
